---
title: "About"
excerpt: "An overview of the EGYLandscape Project"
toc: true
layout: single
permalink: /about/
---

## Overview

This three-year project, the first of its kind, aims to explore the
historical landscapes of Egypt throughout the thirteenth and eighteenth
centuries and is comprised of leading experts in a diverse array of
specialities including archeology, history and environmental studies.
Jointly funded by the French and German science foundations --- Agence
nationale de la recherche (ANR) and Deutsche
ForschungsgemeinschaftÂ (DFG) --- the EGYLandscape Project is codirected
by Prof. Nicolas Michel (Aix-Marseille University, France) and Prof.
Albrecht Fuess (University of Marburg, Germany). The cooperation centers
upon the transformations occurring within pre-modern rural Egypt, an
issue of upmost importance at the current moment.

## Dilemma With Current Research

The state of research on natural and human spaces in Egypt has reached a
threshold where reflection cannot progress without pooling together
disciplines and periods (late Middle Ages, i.e. Mamluk, with the early
modern, i.e. Ottoman). Archaeologists have become sensitive to the
natural and human context of the settlements they study but face an
absence of data for the Islamic period, especially after the twelth
century. Historians, and especially medievalists, must deal with the
limited corpus of available sources and move beyond traditionally
Cairo-centric history in order to open the field of research to rural
and environmental studies.

The environmental history of Egypt in the pre-modern period is a newly
emerging field. Most extant work has primarily focused on Egypt's
agricultural history, especially its economic relevance for ruling
regimes. Less research has explored the rural environment of Egypt
within its ecological context or with regards to the impact of changing
demography. The pre-modern hydraulic system is beginning to be better
understood, but its evolution over centuries and its impact on human
geography remains to be clarified. Furthermore, while land use has been
considered in light of farming and food production, we know far less
about the nature of land ownership and its evolution during the six
centuries under scrutiny. Thus, it is important to widen the scope of
study beyond the cultivator or the village, by exploring the interplay
between the urban and rural as well as intra-village relationships.
Large geographic stretches of Egypt remain nearly unstudied in both
periods, especially the Western Desert and the Middle Nile Valley.
Finally, there is a gap in the historical record regarding demographic
settlement patterns, and how these patterns were driven by ecological
factors and catastrophes -- like the plague and regime direction.

## Addressing These Issues

In addressing these issues, the EGYLandscape Project brings together
textual historians and archaeologists for regular, interdisciplinary
collaborations -- in the form of workshops. Furthermore, the Project is
developing a GIS mapping project --- the Survey of Medieval Egypt ---
that will allow for a better visualization of the transformations
happening within Egypt as regards land and water use, demography, and
ecology. We hope the GIS will remain an invaluable resource for later
scholars. With a variety of sources and a multidisciplinary approach,
the EGYLandscape project will further the discussion on the changes
occurring within Egyptian agriculture, its countryside and peasantry,
and its ecology during the Mamluk and Ottoman Periods.

## Goals

The EGYLandscape Project's cooperative approach allows for a reappraisal
of sources, with archaeological and material evidence taken alongside
the textual and archival record. One specific goal of the project is
this synthesis of source material. Currently there is a great disparity
between the archaeological information available and its employment in
historical work. Often times, with regards to Mamluk and Ottoman Egypt,
the archaeologists' work and field reporting is not incorporated and
utilized fully by their historian counterparts. Furthermore, there are
few settings in which the two sides come together in discussion of
common thematic issues. It is a primary goal of this project to rectify
this issue by bringing historians and archaeologists together in the
discussion and advancement of a shared theme, notably that of the
project: transformations in agriculture, landscapes, and ecology. 

To this end, the EGYLandscape Project is hosting four annual workshops:
- [x] Marburg (2019)
- [ ] Cairo (2020)
- [ ] Alexandria (2021)
- [ ] Aix-en-Provence (2022).

More information about these workshops and other activities is
available on this site.

Expanding out of this cooperation, the EGYLandscape project seeks to add
another voice to the public discourse and create a forum for scholarly
forum. To this end, the project provides regular [working papers](http://mhshaaban.github.io/minimal-mistakes/papers/) from its
members as well as actively engaging in various academic and public
fora. Throughout the project's duration, the team will produce two
publications: a mid-project special journal issue and a final edited
volume. The largest impact, however, will be the GIS mapping of medieval
Egypt. This mapping will help scholars and the public better visualize
Egypt in the Mamluk and Ottoman periods by showing settlement patterns,
resource distribution, agricultural activities, land use, and more. This
will endure beyond the end of the project in 2022 as a resource for
future researchers.
